I stand on Mount Evans in Colorado, USA
It is one of the Colorado Fourteeners
This means that I stand at more than 14,000 feet above sea level.
Like the Americans measure it.
For the rest of the world:
that is 4.3 kilometers above sea level
or about halfway the flying altitude of a passenger plane.
The air here is thin.
Every time I inhale, I get about 60% of my normal oxygen.
And I can tell you, it was a difficult climb
At least, the last piece ...
This is also the most American mountain ever.
There is a road all the way to the top.
The highest asphalt road of North America.
The peak counts as the 41st highest mountain in North America.
But how do we measure that?
A little further away is the beautifully named Meyer-Womble Observatory.
This is on a peak that is slightly lower.
And he is surrounded by lower ground.
Why is that not the 42nd highest mountain in North America?
You could say:
That seems clear to me. The peak is part of the same mountain?
But when does that stop?
The peak, Mount Evans, is a small part of a large mountain range.
You could argue that this is just a valley
on the way to the highest peak in the Rockies, Mount Elbert.
Or you can make it even more extreme and say it
that there is only one mountain on every land mass.
And that every peak is actually a small bump
on the way to a mountain as big as a continent, with the name Denali.
Most people would say that that is idiotic.
It is clear, is not it?
That is a mountain.
And that is not a mountain.
Formally we solve this by measuring protrusions.
Projections work as follows:
Imagine that you can pull up the sea to where I am now.
How many meters does he have to lower again before
this mountain is connected to another, larger mountain?
And all that without getting wet feet?
For Mount Evans that is 839m down.
About 1/5 of its height above sea level.
The peak of the observatory?
It is not prominent.
Of course you have to walk down from there, but after a few meters
you go up the mountain again.
Where do we draw the line?
Well, there are different lines to draw, because of course there are.
The International Climb and Mountaineering Federation defines a mountain like
a projection of more than 300m.
That is the height of the Eiffel tower.
I do not think that is very high.
Other people do not agree and say it should be 500m.
or that the protrusions must change with height.
It's a mess.
To be honest, even after my own research, I'm not sure.
Even the people I asked to check my script said:
"eh yes, in the basics this is correct, but technically ...."
This is one of those times when mankind wants to categorize everything,
against the messy reality.
There are always edge cases, and actually every mountain is an edge case.
I will quickly go back down before I get altitude sickness!